#Liberalization of Trade on Growth in Developing Countries

That the benefits of opening up to trade are subject to discussion, is becoming increasingly clear with controversy arising around free trade agreements such as TTIP and CETA in Europe, and TPP in the US. While elementary economic theory is quite clear in stating that free trade is good for everyone, if only to increase economic efficiency. But as with any theory, the question should be asked whether this can actually be observed in practice. Perhaps more sophisticated theories might better capture the mechanisms at work when countries open up to international trade. Because extensive trade liberalizations have been occurring in developing countries far more often in the recent past than in already developed countries, the examples and studies represented in this canon will mostly concern these developing countries.  It may also be argued that developing countries will face the worst of the disadvantages of free trade, as these are likely to face competition by the developed countries’ more competitive industries.

(Insert stylized facts/short history here)

This canon will provide you with references to models of international economics, both elementary and some more advanced ones, and study some identifiable cases of countries opening up to trade. 
By doing so, it should enable you to form an informed opinion on the topic of international trade and its implications. 
(It will also discuss a couple of questions that you might have in more detail. "Insert research questions here")

##The Classical (Orthodox) Models of International Trade

Traditional theories of international trade focuses on inter-industry trade of products between countries by analyzing the import and export of goods that cross national boundaries. They aim to understand what are the factors that are at the origin of the international specialization of the countries (i.e. what are the types of goods exported or imported by each country and why); the effects of the opening to international trade (who will gain and who will lose in the process of specialization); and finally, a third area of study (trade policy) concerns the possible actions to be taken to restrict imports and encourage exports, and the effects of these measures on the economic well-being.

'Zhang W.B. (2008), _International Trade Theory Capital, Knowledge, Economic Structure, Money, and Prices over Time_, Springer, Berlin'

'Gandolfo G. (2014), _International Trade Theory and Policy_, Springer, Berlin'

The Theory of Absolute Advantages (Adam Smith, 1776)
----
According to the classical theory of absolute advantages, nations gain in trading between each other when one country has an absolute advantage in one production whereas the other country has an absolute advantage in producing a different good. In this conditions, both nations would benefit to produce the product in which they have the absolute advantage, and trade the product in which they have the absolute disadvantage. According to Smith, differences in production capacity among countries lead to a better division of labor at international level, which triggers economies of scales, efficiency and eventually growth. He criticized the mercantilist approach of considering trade as a zero-sum game, demonstrating that both countries can benefit from free trade (Zhang, 2008).

The Theory of Comparative Advantages (David Ricardo, 1817)
----
Ricardo (1817) went further the initial Smith’s intuition by introducing the notion of comparative advantages, according to which a country exports the product in which it has a comparative cost advantage and imports the product in which it has a comparative disadvantage. According to Ricardo, the primary determinant of international trade lies in the existing technological differences between different countries, which are substantiated in different relative productivity levels and different wages in different production sectors. The combination of productivity and labor costs make it more convenient, for each country to produce only some goods and to import other goods from foreign countries, where such goods can be produced more cost effectively. The opening to international trade, therefore, leads each country to specialize in the production in which it is relatively more efficient (Zhang, 2008). The necessary condition for this model to hold is the existence of a difference of "comparative costs", which in turn reflects differences in production techniques; in addition, the trade terms have to be between the comparative costs of the two countries, without never be equal to any of the two. Occurred both conditions, each country will have convenience to specialize in the production of the good that has the greatest relative advantage (or relatively minor disadvantage). Finally, it is assumed that costs of production in the two countries are constant and measurable using a common unit of measure, which is labor, and that only one country has an absolute advantage in the production of one of the two goods concerned. For simplicity the transport costs are ignored (Gandolfo, 2014)

The Theory of factor endowments (Heckscher and Ohlin, 1933)
----
Ricardo explained that the comparative advantage stems from differences in productivity of labor, but does not explain the reason why there is a difference in labor productivity between countries. In this regard, Heckscher and Ohlin (1933) argued that the comparative advantage rises from differences in the relative factor endowments. The countries differ from each other based on factors of production that they possess. Goods differ according to the factors of production that are required to produce them. The HO model supports that a country enjoys a comparative advantage in a specific good, if it has a good supply of input materials for its production. The basic logic is that the more abundant a factor, the lower its cost. The differences in factor endowments of the various countries explain differences in factor costs, differences that form the comparative advantage. Exemplifying the theory, it is possible to think of two factors of production, capital and labor (while in the Ricardian model the only factor of production was labor). The HO model assumes that the production methods are different among countries, even if their technology is the same: different methods result in different combinations of capital and labor. In other words, countries can choose different production methods based on the cost of production factors. Thus, the patterns of production and trade are explained by different factor endowments. It is convenient to export to foreign markets those goods produced with higher intensity by a factor relatively abundant and therefore less expensive (Gandolfo, 2014).

## Beyond the Classical Models

Although the core theories of international trade have focussed on factor endowment and comparative advantages in technological differences, the aspects of learning and foreign direct investment (FDI) require more attention. According to Gandolfo (xxxx), the transfer of financial assets worldwide has grown faster than the transfer of commodities. This shows that the transfer of capital and financial assets across borders has increased rapidly, highlighting its importance. Furthermore, the classical (Ricardo) model explains international trade based on technological differences, but assumes these differences to be static. Ricardo’s model is limited in the fact that it doesn’t explain the effect on international trade with increased technological innovation. However, technological innovation, which can also be linked to knowledge accumulation or increased learning, is the main driver of growth in the world economy and improves the competitiveness of a country. Putting more emphasis on the importance of knowledge is therefore crucial and needs to be included in further analysis. 

'Stiglitz, J. E., & Greenwald, B. C. (2014). Creating a learning society. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.'
Stiglitz and Greenwald in their book Creating a learning society focus on the importance of learning, that is learning by doing, learning to learn by learning or learning spillovers. Although their focus is not on the effects of liberalization of trade with respect to learning, they do offer valuable lessons and insights regarding opening up to trade. One of them is that a country can increase domestic output by attracting multinationals and investments. However, the benefits of the obtained output largely go to the supplier of capital that is the multinational and not the society of the country. Therefore when GDP increases, GNP might even decrease and the citizens are worse off (p. 41). 

In favour of protectionism, they also argue that increased domestic production can hold learning benefits for a country’s society and that the modern literature has largely not mentioned these positive externalities (p. 54). Protectionism can make domestic producers competitive so they will survive foreign competition in the case of opening up to trade. A dynamic comparative advantage can be developed, which opposes the believe of comparative advantages to be static. This arguments is called the infant-industry argument, which can be extended to an infant-economy argument, for protection and Stiglitz and Greenwald describe it as follows:

<The infant-industry argument for protection held that developing countries should protect their “infants” so they could become more productive (learn-by-doing) and thus become competitive with the more advanced countries. Without such protection, the developing economies would be relegated to producing traditional goods marked by slow growth in productivity. (p. 332)>

'Aghion, P., Howitt, P. W. (2009). The economics of growth. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.'

Aghion and Howitt discuss many details concerning growth in their book. Chapter 15, Liberalizing Trade, discusses the effects on growth of opening up to trade. One of these effects is the market-size effect, which states that openness of trade increases the size of markets, which can then lead to increasing the scale of production. Note that the market-size effect should be higher for countries with relatively small domestic market size. Furthermore, trade transfers knowledge across borders, from the technological frontier to the technological follower. These knowledge spillovers are most beneficial for a country that is furthest behind in the relevant technology. Moreover, exporters and domestic producers have to become more competitive in the presence of foreign competition. They have to learn how to compete and become more productive. This tends to select the most productive producers in each sector and increase the overall productivity of a country (pp. 353-354).
  
In conclusion, for a country to benefit from openness to trade, one should be able to catch up with the technologies, meaning that the barriers to innovation should be limited. Aghion and Howitt presume “that if there are instances where trade is bad for growth, they are probably in small countries that start off far behind the global technology frontier” (p. 370). And they argue that “it might be better to remove barriers to innovation first and then to wait until several domestic industries have become world leaders before removing the barriers to international trade” (p. 371).

'Alfaro, L., & Chen, M. X. (2014). The global agglomeration of multinational firms. Journal of International Economics, 94, 263–276. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2014.09.001'

Also when it comes to FDI and the part that multinationals play in opening up to trade we find the same remark. Removing barriers to innovation or in other words providing an infrastructure of easy technology diffusion is crucial for successful liberalization of trade. 
Alfaro and Chen look at the factors that determine the location choice of a multinational firm. They conclude from their findings that developing countries could attract multinational companies by providing the infrastructure for supporting easy diffusion of technology. This in turn could lead to growth if also the benefits of production accrue to not only the GDP but also the GNP.

'Tintelnot, F. (2014). Global production with export platforms, WTO Staff Working Paper, No. ERSD-2014-17'

After the multinationals have settled and contributed to the domestic GDP, Tintelnot reveals that multinationals play a significant role in the knowledge spillovers “as they can jump the barriers to international trade”. He finds that productivity increases in US firms led to higher welfare gains in foreign countries due to the presence of multinationals.

He also complemented his statement with another phenomena. In the face of international trade agreements, multinationals have the ability to move to the most favourable country in terms of cost structure due to changes in the law and trade. This means that trade and investment agreements can result in a third-country effect. Multinational production sites in America might move to Canada after CETA has been signed. 
