
Long story short, Economic Integration is achieved mainly from trade liberalisation. What we question here is, however, to what extent
does opening up the economy to the foreign countries promote effective Economic Development.
Under the empirical evidences of trade liberalisation we address to the case of the Pacific Arch. A process in which we can distinguish
3 different phases:
	
  - The case of Japan; (not an example of trade liberalization, quite the opposite)
	- The Asian Tigers (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan)
	- The 2nd Generation of Industrialised countries (Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and China)

The mentioned region was not exactly wealthy nor in resources and capital. Nevertheless the labor is abundant, disciplined, capable and
rather cheap.

We ought to refer South Korea (now will be referred simply as Korea) as an example in which trade liberalisation effectively promoted a
sustained growth of the national economy. We are talking about a country which is poor in natural resources with a scarce cultivable
land. A country composed by a widely agrarian and feudalistic society. In the early 60’s unemployment and poverty were reaching extreme
levels. Well South Korea is now one of the highly industrialised economies of the world, representing a fair share of the world’s trade
and a already well established developed country.

The gradual growth of Korea was outlined in three different policy steps: (1)Import Substitution, 1954 - 1960; (2) Outward orientation,
1961-1979; (3) Balance and consolidation.

The first step taken is a clear change of route for the Korean economy, switching from a Import- Substituting country to a Exporting
intensive country. In raw terms, as if the former industries are boosted in such way that it allows openness to other countries.

In the early 60’s Korea started by eliminating tariffs on imported inputs and capital goods given that these promote an export expansion
industry. As in Westphal and Kim (1977) this was the most relevant policy towards exports-expansion. The coming decades, starting in
1970, were characterised by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)- now known as the World Trade Organisation (WTO)- sets
promoted for global tariff reduction, namely the Kennedy Round and the Tokyo Round which allowed for a gradual reduction of tariff rates
from around 40 percent all the way to 13 percent. 

Lower tariffs facilitated specialisation which allowed for an increase in total factor productivity, in raw terms, productivity. Also
with the tariffs being lower it enabled the import of investment goods which allows for capital accumulation - essential for a solid
industrialisation process. These factors are generally associated with an increase in per capita GDP as was the case. The Korean
government made the conditions favourable for the export oriented sectors, so they could compete against the highly industrialised USA,
UK and even Japan. As stated in Westphal(1990): “Korea’s industrial performance owes a great deal to the government’s promotional
policies toward exports and to its initiatives in targeting industries for development. If nothing else, policies towards exports have
created an atmosphere--rare in the Third World--in which businessmen could be certain that the economic system would respond to and
subsequently reward their efforts aimed at expanding and upgrading exports.” 

Looking at South Korea now we have a solidified nation. One in which the income gap is rather low. The industries here located tend to
use state-of-the-art technology which promotes also higher levels of education - ultimately resulting in a skilled and high-income
labor.

As further evidence for the benefits of free trade we propose the not so successful case of India during approximately the same time
period. Even though India managed to increase its GDP growth rate (between 1950 and 1980) this increase in the growth rate was nowhere
near that witnessed in Korea. The focus on protectionism in India was such that in the 1970’s all imports went under strict license,
reaching a level of nearly 3 percent of the GDP in 1975/76.


All in all during 1960-1980 the average per capita GDP growth was 6.3 percent for Korea and only 1.1 percent in India. While Korea
managed to turn towards an outward-oriented trade regime India followed a protectionist approach. The fact that the Indian government
followed an import-substituting policy did not allow for at least the import of inputs of higher quality such that the efficiency levels
could be increased.


_In contrast to what was the case in the Asian countries, Latin American countries such as Brazil and Mexico did not observe the same
favorable effects of trade growth:_

#(Ravenga, 1994, “Employment and Wage Effects of Trade Liberalization: The Case of Mexican Manufacturing”).#
In Mexico, according to, a 10% reduction in tariff levels was associated with 2-3% reduction in employment; the wage differential
between skilled and unskilled workers sharply increased, while real wages of unskilled workers declined. The most fundamental reason
pointed out for this result was the predominant wage flexibility. 

(Mesquita & Najberg, 2000, “Trade liberalisation in Brazil: Creating or exporting jobs?”)
Brazil is a resource-abundant country, and Brazilian exports are concentrated in the products with the lowest degree of processing. In
Brazil, the trade liberalization that took place in the early 1990s caused a short-term 32.4% drop in employment in capital-intensive
industries due to a sharp increase in productivity. Furthermore, as the domestic market opened its borders to new import-products, the
export performance of the country degraded, causing a 13.3% decline in the employment of labor-intensive industries. 

(DESA Working Paper No. 5, 2005, “Trade Liberalization and Employment”)
Looking back at the framework of economic models, such as the Hecksher-Ohlin and the Stolper-Samuelson model, we see that contrary to
their predictions wage inequality has increased after trade liberalization in several countries. Outsourcing and the relocation of
labor-intensive parts of production processes from advanced to developing countries play also part in this phenomenon. This is not to
say that the models are necessarily invalid, since Asian countries had quite an opposite experience, but rather to indicate that
country-specific and contingent factors are important when discussing the benefits of trade liberalization. The difference between Latin
American and Asian countries was that in Latin American countries there were problems of macroeconomic management, an extremely unequal
distribution of assets, and an overdependence on external resources. Asian countries instead, moved towards a more neutral trade regime
through selective export-promotion policies. The successful implementation of such an interventionist strategy of promoting infant
industries and “picking winners” in industrial policy requires a strong state and an efficient administration, conditions that are not
widely met in developing countries. To this extent therefore such a strategy may not be widely replicable even if underlying economic
circumstances make it potentially feasible. 

(Sachs and Warner, 1995, Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth)
(Dollar, 1992, “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly”)
A prominent case in point are two studies that have been highly influential in forming the widely accepted view that countries with
lower policy-induced barriers to trade experience faster growth, once other relevant country characteristics are controlled. Both of
these studies are based on a cross-section analysis for a large number of countries regarding the relationship between an index of
“openness” of the economy and growth performance. The Dollar study claimed that for a sample of 95 countries over the period between
1976 and 1985, growth was negatively correlated with each of the two indices of openness used. The first index was a measure of real
exchange rate distortion while the other was an index of real exchange rate variability. The rationale for the use of these indices was
that the more open an economy, the lower the extent of exchange rate distortion and the less the variability in the exchange rate. The
Sachs and Warner study arrives at a similar conclusion on the relationship between the degree of openness and growth. The study is a
cross-section analysis of a large sample of 70 countries. Countries were classified as either “open” or “closed” based on five criteria
the level of average tariffs, the coverage of non-tariff barriers, whether or not it had a socialist economic system, whether or not it
had a state monopoly of major exports, and the level of the black market premium.

(Rodriguez and Rodrik, 1999, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Sceptic’s Guide to the Cross-National Evidence”)
The findings of the above two studies have been seriously questioned by a convincing critique which centers on the fact that the
indicators of “openness” used are seriously flawed. They are not reliable measures of trade barriers and are also highly correlated with
other sources of poor economic performance. That being the case, the proposition that trade liberalization by itself leads to higher
growth remains unproven. 

(Dollar and Kraay, 2001, “Trade, Growth, and Poverty”)
Attempting to revive the issue, this paper identifies a group of countries, the “post-1980 globalizers” that have seen large increases
in trade and significant declines in tariffs over the past 20 years and claims that “their growth rates have accelerated from the 1970s
to the 1980s to the 1990s, even as growth in the rich countries and the rest of the developing world has declined”. The paper also
claims that “since there is little systematic evidence of a relationship between changes in trade volumes (or any other globalization
measure we consider) and changes in the income share of the poorest, the increase in growth rates that accompanies expanded trade leads
to proportionate increases in incomes of the poor”. The paper is, however, more convincing on the effects of trade expansion on growth
than on the effects of trade policy. 

(Rodrik, 2001, “The Global Governance of Trade as if Development really Mattered”)
The paper denotes that the work of Dollar And Kraay (2001) is also flawed by applying an “arbitrary set of selection criteria to their
sample of countries”. In particular, they “combine a policy measure (tariff averages) with an outcome (import/GDP) measure in selecting
countries. Rodrik explicitly stated: “This is conceptually inappropriate, as policy makers do not directly control the level of trade.
The tools at the disposal of governments are tariff and non-tariff barriers, not import or export levels”. This is significant because
the countries in the sample that implemented the deepest trade liberalization, as opposed to those who experienced the greatest trade
expansion, did not perform well in terms of the rate of economic growth achieved. Similarly, it was inappropriate to attribute the
higher growth in India and China to trade liberalization. In these countries, “the main trade reforms took place about a decade after
the onset of higher growth. Moreover, these countries’ trade restrictions remain among the highest in the world”.

(Greenaway, Morgan and Wright, 1998, “Trade Liberalization and Growth in Developing Countries”)
A recent review of the empirical evidence on the effects of trade liberalization also comes to a more nuanced conclusion than the
earlier Dollar or Sachs and Warner studies. This review concludes that trade liberalization has resulted in both an increase and a
decline in the growth rate depending on country circumstances. Many countries were observed to have experienced an investment slump
after trade liberalization, suggesting that a “J-curve” effect is at work. This suggests that there are at least short-run costs of
adjustment after trade liberalization. Trade liberalization has also tended to be associated with an increase in current account
deficits in spite of an increase in exports. These mixed results indicate that the impact of trade liberalization is not uniform but, on
the contrary, is strongly influenced by factors such as the nature of the liberalization program, the extent of pre-existing distortions
in the trade regime and the flexibility of markets.

Conclusions
In general, there is no question for the beneficial role of trade liberalization in terms of its growth, employment and distributional
implications. Nowadays, strong advocates of trade liberalization make a case that the sooner and more extensively trade is liberalized
the greater the benefits will be. These propositions rest on the assumptions such as the existence of perfect competition, fully
employed resources (including labor), only constant returns to scale in production, and that trade will always be balanced.
Notwithstanding, the assumptions in question do not materialize in the real world, where, especially in developing countries, market
imperfections are common and industrial production is characterized by economies of scale. Moreover, even endogenous growth theories
suggest that trade restrictions may also be associated with higher rates of growth of output whenever the restrictions promote
technologically more dynamic sectors over others.



Arvind Panagariya (2003)
Connolly and Yi (2008)
Kim (1991)
Case Studies in Economic Development, Stephen C. Smith, 3rd edition
